Retransmit server initial upon second Initial (#3080)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-recovery.md

probe timer if the client has not received an acknowledgement for one of its
Handshake or 1-RTT packets.

When a server receives duplicate Initial CRYPTO data when there

> is unacknoweledged Initial CRYPTO data, it can assume the client did not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is unacknowledged Initial CRYPTO data, it can assume the client did not
```

data. To speed handshake completion, it SHOULD retransmit all unacknowledged
Initial CRYPTO data subject to the path validation limits.  After doing so,

> the PTO is re-armed.

Reviewer: The server can't arm the PTO prior to confirming that the path is valid.

Author: The server can't send if it's limited by the amplification factor, but the PTO can be armed otherwise.

Reviewer: The way I read this, it says that you retransmit then you re-arm the PTO timer.

I think that you mean to say that when the path is validated, you can re-arm the PTO timer after retransmitting the CRYPTO data, but that's not what it says.

Author: The PTO can be armed prior to path validation, but the text said it always was, which is wrong, so I reworded the paragraph.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we formulate duplicate crypto a bit more precise? Does it mean a valid crypto packet with the same packet number as seen before?

Author: By CRYPTO data, I meant data sent in CRYPTO frames, which is why I used uppercase for CRYPTO.

Initial packets and Handshake packets may never be acknowledged, but they are
removed from bytes in flight when the Initial and Handshake keys are discarded.

### Speeding Up Handshake Completion

When a server receives an Initial packet containing duplicate CRYPTO data,
it can assume the client did not receive all of the server's CRYPTO data sent
in Initial packets, or the client's estimated RTT is too small. When a
client receives Handshake or 1-RTT packets prior to obtaining Handshake keys,

> it may assume some or all of the server's Initial packets were lost.

Reviewer 3: What is the consequence of the client assuming server initials were lost? What would it do in this case to speed up the handshake?

Author: The client sending a packet can trigger this mechanism if the server implements it and it ensures the server is not blocked by the amplification factor.  I could add more detail in the second paragraph if it's helpful?

Reviewer 3: Wait, do you mean "receives and successfully decrypts Handshake or 1-RTT", or I just get something that is marked as such?

Reviewer 4: If you can decrypt them, then clearly the Initial packets you're waiting for weren't lost.

To speed up handshake completion under these conditions, an endpoint MAY send
a packet containing unacknowledged CRYPTO data earlier than the PTO expiry,

> subject to address validation limits. (see Section 8.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subject to address validation limits; see Section 8.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.
```

Peers can also use coalesced packets to ensure that each datagram elicits at least
one acknowledgement.  For example, clients can coalesce an Initial packet
containing PING and PADDING frames with a 0-RTT data packet and a server can
coalesce an Initial packet containing a PING frame with one or more packets in

> its first flight.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this paragraph.  It is implying something about packet composition into datagrams that is inconsistent with our general approach.

Author: Thanks, I'm hoping to write text that's consistent with our approach(ie: one should not assume anything about other QUIC packets that happen to be in the same datagram) and yet note that implementations may want to bundle a small packet(ie: a PING) along with another packet in order to ensure one of the two receives an acknowledgement.  Feel free to suggest clearer text.

Reviewer: I guess that I misread it, but here is an alternative...

An endpoint can coalesce packet from multiple packet number spaces with a probe. This allows the peer can drive loss recovery even when it is unable to process some packet types. Endpoints can include a PING frame in packets from spaces other than the one that caused the probe to be sent.

Reviewer 4: I think what's missing is any description of _why_ an implementation might want to do that except things we don't really want to encourage.  The obvious reading is that clients are tracking whether the datagram was received, inferring that the other packets in that datagram were received but not processed (or processable?), and removing everything in that datagram from bytes-in-flight.  But it doesn't explicitly say that.  I'd either get more explicit, or not make the reference.

Reviewer: My understanding is that this economizes probe packets.  Those are limited and # pn spaces > # probe packets.

Initial packets and Handshake packets may never be acknowledged, but they are
removed from bytes in flight when the Initial and Handshake keys are discarded.

> ### Speeding Handshake Completion

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Speeding Up Handshake Completion
```

> When a server receives duplicate Initial CRYPTO data, it can assume the client

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When a server receives an Initial packet containing duplicate data in a CRYPTO frame, it can assume the client
```

> did not receive all Initial CRYPTO data or the client's estimated RTT is too

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
did not receive all of the server's CRYPTO data sent in Initial packets, or the client's estimated RTT is too
```

small. When a client receives Handshake or 1-RTT packets prior to obtaining
Handshake keys it may assume some or all of the server's Initial packets were
lost.

> To speed handshake completion, either peer MAY send a packet containing

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To speed up handshake completion under these conditions, an endpoint MAY send a packet containing
```

> unacknowledged Initial CRYPTO data subject to the path validation limits, as

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
unacknowledged CRYPTO data, subject to path validation limits, earlier than the PTO period.
```

> though the PTO expired. The PTO MUST only be shortened once in this way.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

> Subsequently, the PTO uses the normal calculation with exponential backoff.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

> Peers can also use coalesced packets to ensure each datagram elicits at least

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Peers can also use coalesced packets to ensure that each datagram elicits at least
```

one acknowledgement.  For example, clients can coalesce an Initial packet

> containing a PING and PADDING with 0-RTT data packets and a server can

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
containing PING and PADDING frames with a 0-RTT data packet and a server can
```

> coalesce an Initial packet containing a PING with one or more packets in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
coalesce an Initial packet containing a PING frame with one or more packets in
```

Initial packets and Handshake packets may never be acknowledged, but they are
removed from bytes in flight when the Initial and Handshake keys are discarded.

### Speeding Handshake Completion

When a server receives duplicate Initial CRYPTO data, it can assume the client
did not receive all Initial CRYPTO data or the client's estimated RTT is too
small. When a client receives Handshake packets prior to obtaining Handshake

> keys it may assume some or all of the server's Initial packets were lost.

Reviewer 6: As there's a chance where a client receives an 1-RTT packet before it receives Initial and Handshake packets, I think it'd be more natural to cover that case too.

Maybe s/When a client receives Handshake packets/When a client receives Handshake or 1-RTT packets/.

To speed handshake completion, either peer MAY send a packet containing
unacknowledged Initial CRYPTO data subject to the path validation limits, as
though the PTO expired. A client MAY send an ack-eliciting packet with no
CRYPTO data if all Initial data has been acknowledged.  The PTO can only be
shortened once in this way. Subsequently, the PTO uses the normal calculation

> with exponential backoff.

Reviewer 6: Am I correct in assuming that this way of setting the PTO is to be used *only until* an endpoint learns the RTT?

Consider the case where the server sends three datagrams (Initial1(CRYPTO+ACK), Initial2(CRYPTO), Handshake1(CRYPTO)) as its first flight. When Initial2 gets dropped but other packets are received by the client, the client would have an RTT estimate (as it processes the ACK in Initial1), but also have an undecryptable Handshake packet too, which this section discusses about.

My intuition is that the provision of this paragraph should not be invoked in such a case, as RTT has already been learnt.

If that is the case, it might be a good idea to clarify that the section is about estimating PTO until an RTT estimation is obtained.

Author: Good question.  It is aimed at the case when there are no RTT estimates, but I think there are a few cases like the one you're outlining where speeding up retransmission of the Initial2 data from a standard PTO is sensible, even if the server gets an ACK of Initial1.  The PTO in this case is expected to be 3*RTT (SRTT + 4*RTTVar) vs 1*RTT if you follow this optimization.  Given that, any suggestions on changes?
